---
layout: post
title: Test R
tags: [R, how-to, R-tips, code]
---

Diverging and 100% stacked bar charts are an effective way to visualize Likert Scale data. In R there are two main packages -- [*HH*](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/HH/index.html) and [*likert*](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/likert/index.html) -- that turn Likert Scale data into pretty charts. I have used both extensively to make pretty plots and, personally, I like the *likert* package more because it works with `ggplot` objects and functions but I will run through a quick tutorial of both here. 

### *HH* Package

#### Preparing Your Data

What you now know about HH

* Must use a summary table for :( 
* Create a column for the legend 
* Custom colors 
* how to save 
  * need to use png()

### 	*likert* package 

My workflow with the *likert* package is to use the `likert`  function nested inside of the `plot` function. Like this: 

> `plot(likert(arg1,arg2), arg3, ...)`

#### Preparing Your Data

The *likert* package will accept two types of input data:

1.  data in a long format data frame or tibble
2. a summary table of the Likert data 

##### Long Format Data

When your data is in the long format, ensure that each variable within the data frame is a factor. These variables will be their own category on the graph. Within each of these categories you can group the data by some other factor variable -- the $$n$$th variable in the data frame where $$n-1$$ variables are used as data for graphing. 

To graph the whole data frame:

> plot(likert(myData), arg2, ...)

To create a graph with groupings within each category where the $$n$$th column is the grouping variable:

> `plot(likert(myData[,c(1:n-1)], grouping = myData[,n]), arg3, ...)`

I tried to execute this with tidy via `select()` but the *likert* package refused to comply. So, I am using some old fashioned indexing.  Recall that data frames can be indexed [row, column] and if you want to grab a bunch of columns you need to put it in vector `c(start:stop)` where start and stop are inclusive. Meaning, in the above code snippet we are grabbing the first column (indexing starts at 1 in R!) through the second to last column for graphing and using the last column for grouping. 

There may be a more elegant way to do it but here is how I create my data frames for plotting:

```R
load(file = "../data/sample-likert-data.rda") #our data, see likert-data-generation.Rmd for more info

## Rename Cols
dental_hyg  <- dental_hyg  %>% 
  rename("How Often Respondents Use Mouth Wash" = mouth_wash,
          "How Often Respondents Brush Their Teeth" = tooth_brush,
          "How Often Respondents Use Floss" = floss)

## New df for not grouped
dh <- dental_hyg %>% select(-age)

## Not Grouped
# plot(likert(dh)) # basic not grouped
plot(likert(dh), legend.position="right")

## Grouped
# plot(likert(dental_hyg[,c(1:3)], grouping = dental_hyg[,4])) # basic grouped
plot(likert(dental_hyg[,c(1:3)], grouping = dental_hyg[,4]), legend.position="right")
```

Notice here that I rename the variables in the data frame because their names will be displayed in the Likert graph. I then use tidyverse functions to create a second data frame of the data I am interested in graphing. 
